thermodynamics is the branch of physics concerned with heat and temperature and their relation to energy and work. the behavior of these quantities is governed by the four laws of thermodynamics, irrespective of the composition or specific properties of the material or system in question. the laws of thermodynamics are explained in terms of microscopic constituents by statistical mechanics. thermodynamics applies to a wide variety of topics in science and engineering, especially physical chemistry, chemical engineering and mechanical engineering.

historically, thermodynamics developed out of a desire to increase the efficiency of early steam engines, particularly through the work of french physicist nicolas lonard sadi carnot (1824) who believed that engine efficiency was the key that could help france win the napoleonic wars. scottish physicist lord kelvin was the first to formulate a concise definition of thermodynamics in 1854 which stated, "thermo-dynamics is the subject of the relation of heat to forces acting between contiguous parts of bodies, and the relation of heat to electrical agency."

the initial application of thermodynamics to mechanical heat engines was extended early on to the study of chemical compounds and chemical reactions. chemical thermodynamics studies the nature of the role of entropy in the process of chemical reactions and has provided the bulk of expansion and knowledge of the field. other formulations of thermodynamics emerged in the following decades. statistical thermodynamics, or statistical mechanics, concerned itself with statistical predictions of the collective motion of particles from their microscopic behavior. in 1909, constantin carathodory presented a purely mathematical approach to the field in his axiomatic formulation of thermodynamics, a description often referred to as geometrical thermodynamics.
a description of any thermodynamic system employs the four laws of thermodynamics that form an axiomatic basis. the first law specifies that energy can be exchanged between physical systems as heat and work. the second law defines the existence of a quantity called entropy, that describes the direction, thermodynamically, that a system can evolve and quantifies the state of order of a system and that can be used to quantify the useful work that can be extracted from the system.

in thermodynamics, interactions between large ensembles of objects are studied and categorized. central to this are the concepts of the thermodynamic system and its surroundings. a system is composed of particles, whose average motions define its properties, and those properties are in turn related to one another through equations of state. properties can be combined to express internal energy and thermodynamic potentials, which are useful for determining conditions for equilibrium and spontaneous processes.

with these tools, thermodynamics can be used to describe how systems respond to changes in their environment. this can be applied to a wide variety of topics in science and engineering, such as engines, phase transitions, chemical reactions, transport phenomena, and even black holes. the results of thermodynamics are essential for other fields of physics and for chemistry, chemical engineering, aerospace engineering, mechanical engineering, cell biology, biomedical engineering, materials science, and economics, to name a few.

this article is focused mainly on classical thermodynamics which primarily studies systems in thermodynamic equilibrium. non-equilibrium thermodynamics is often treated as an extension of the classical treatment, but statistical mechanics has brought many advances to that field.

the history of thermodynamics as a scientific discipline generally begins with otto von guericke who, in 1650, built and designed the world's first vacuum pump and demonstrated a vacuum using his magdeburg hemispheres. guericke was driven to make a vacuum in order to disprove aristotle's long-held supposition that 'nature abhors a vacuum'. shortly after guericke, the english physicist and chemist robert boyle had learned of guericke's designs and, in 1656, in coordination with english scientist robert hooke, built an air pump. using this pump, boyle and hooke noticed a correlation between pressure, temperature, and volume. in time, boyle's law was formulated, which states that pressure and volume are inversely proportional. then, in 1679, based on these concepts, an associate of boyle's named denis papin built a steam digester, which was a closed vessel with a tightly fitting lid that confined steam until a high pressure was generated.

later designs implemented a steam release valve that kept the machine from exploding. by watching the valve rhythmically move up and down, papin conceived of the idea of a piston and a cylinder engine. he did not, however, follow through with his design. nevertheless, in 1697, based on papin's designs, engineer thomas savery built the first engine, followed by thomas newcomen in 1712. although these early engines were crude and inefficient, they attracted the attention of the leading scientists of the time.

the fundamental concepts of heat capacity and latent heat, which were necessary for the development of thermodynamics, were developed by professor joseph black at the university of glasgow, where james watt was employed as an instrument maker. black and watt performed experiments together, but it was watt who conceived the idea of the external condenser which resulted in a large increase in steam engine efficiency. drawing on all the previous work led sadi carnot, the "father of thermodynamics", to publish reflections on the motive power of fire (1824), a discourse on heat, power, energy and engine efficiency. the book outlined the basic energetic relations between the carnot engine, the carnot cycle, and motive power. it marked the start of thermodynamics as a modern science.

the first thermodynamic textbook was written in 1859 by william rankine, originally trained as a physicist and a civil and mechanical engineering professor at the university of glasgow. the first and second laws of thermodynamics emerged simultaneously in the 1850s, primarily out of the works of william rankine, rudolf clausius, and william thomson (lord kelvin).

the foundations of statistical thermodynamics were set out by physicists such as james clerk maxwell, ludwig boltzmann, max planck, rudolf clausius and j. willard gibbs.

during the years 1873-76 the american mathematical physicist josiah willard gibbs published a series of three papers, the most famous being on the equilibrium of heterogeneous substances, in which he showed how thermodynamic processes, including chemical reactions, could be graphically analyzed, by studying the energy, entropy, volume, temperature and pressure of the thermodynamic system in such a manner, one can determine if a process would occur spontaneously. also pierre duhem in the 19th century wrote about chemical thermodynamics. during the early 20th century, chemists such as gilbert n. lewis, merle randall, and e. a. guggenheim applied the mathematical methods of gibbs to the analysis of chemical processes.
the etymology of thermodynamics has an intricate history. it was first spelled in a hyphenated form as an adjective (thermo-dynamic) and from 1854 to 1868 as the noun thermo-dynamics to represent the science of generalized heat engines.

american biophysicist donald haynie claims that thermodynamics was coined in 1840 from the greek root  therme, meaning heat and dynamis, meaning power. however, this etymology has been cited as unlikely.

pierre perrot claims that the term thermodynamics was coined by james joule in 1858 to designate the science of relations between heat and power, however, joule never used that term, but used instead the term perfect thermo-dynamic engine in reference to thomsons 1849 phraseology.

by 1858, thermo-dynamics, as a functional term, was used in william thomson's paper "an account of carnot's theory of the motive power of heat."
an important concept in thermodynamics is the thermodynamic system, which is a precisely defined region of the universe under study. everything in the universe except the system is called the surroundings. a system is separated from the remainder of the universe by a boundary which may be a physical boundary or notional, but which by convention defines a finite volume. exchanges of work, heat, or matter between the system and the surroundings take place across this boundary.

in practice, the boundary of a system is simply an imaginary dotted line drawn around a volume within which is going to be a change in the internal energy of that volume. anything that passes across the boundary that effects a change in the internal energy of the system needs to be accounted for in the energy balance equation. the volume can be the region surrounding a single atom resonating energy, such as max planck defined in 1900; it can be a body of steam or air in a steam engine, such as sadi carnot defined in 1824; it can be the body of a tropical cyclone, such as kerry emanuel theorized in 1986 in the field of atmospheric thermodynamics; it could also be just one nuclide (i.e. a system of quarks) as hypothesized in quantum thermodynamics, or the event horizon of a black hole.

boundaries are of four types: fixed, movable, real, and imaginary. for example, in an engine, a fixed boundary means the piston is locked at its position, within which a constant volume process might occur. if the piston is allowed to move that boundary is movable while the cylinder and cylinder head boundaries are fixed. for closed systems, boundaries are real while for open systems boundaries are often imaginary. in the case of a jet engine, a fixed imaginary boundary might be assumed at the intake of the engine, fixed boundaries along the surface of the case and a second fixed imaginary boundary across the exhaust nozzle.

generally, thermodynamics distinguishes three classes of systems, defined in terms of what is allowed to cross their boundaries